---
layout: post
title: "Lessons from a Leisurely Day"
date: 2010-05-01 17:17:00
categories: thought
---
With Tennis and AP Tests waiting just around the corner, it has become increasingly hard to motivate myself to program. It is just another thing to pack into an already busy schedule. After much encouragement from a friend, I abandoned all plans to study and spent the morning coding. Code-wise, I didn't get very far, but I learned a lot about how the Flex system works, and built a game framework that I can re-use.

Flex 3 is one a great product, but at the same time it is a very odd product. Adobe released Flex as an Actionscript compiler, and is sell/giving away the Flex IDE. This allows virtually anyone to develop Flash applications, and removes the previous financial handicap that exists with CS3. But with the release of Flex 3, Adobe removed a lot of key features for game production as an attempt to curb the ability to create viruses, or something like that. Anyway, it makes the language safer, but pretty much makes game production impossible. I contacted John Cooney, and he sent me a piece of code that gets around that problem completely by recreating the Key Class that was removed from Flex 3. That was the challenge that I tackled a few weeks ago. A brief showcase of the [Key.as](/assets/2010/05/Key.txt) class in use can be found in the previous blog post.

My development was stalled again when I was unable to create classes within my game. A class can be something like an enemy. If can have image information, a location, health points, and then an attack level. I was only able to create the image aspect of the enemy. I could create variables to hold all the other data, but I could not tie it to the enemy, and I could not get it to be reusable. To create an enemy, I could not write public var enemy2:enemy = new enemy(); I would have to create the variables all over again. I spent hours trying to get the keyboard input to work and was not about to tackle this problem before. The problem with creating a class was actually incredibly simple. Flex does not allow you to put multiple classes in the same Actionscript file. I simply had to make a new Actionscript file with the new class. This was a pain to learn, but it is good that Flex forces Object-Oriented Programming.

The other key thing that I needed to figure out was image loading. I wanted to be able to take advantage of the sprite class, but I also wanted to be able to use images. Images could be loaded and used, but I could not use them within the framework that I had developed. This minor lack of knowledge was solved by the [SpriteWithBitmap.as](/assets/2010/05/SpriteWithBitmap.txt) file. This piece of code does exactly what it says. It allows me to load an image and tie it to a sprite.

Reading about the problems and simple solutions that I found is probably fairly boring. If I were you, I would have probably stopped reading or skipped ahead. Hopefully this paragraph will be a little bit more interesting. Deciding on what type of game is always the hardest part for me. This morning I decided to take that problem out of my hands entirely. I went to [Omegle](http://www.omegle.com/) and asked simple questions about what game I should make.  Such as the main character's name, the enemy type, and the goals.  This concept is the final product:

> You play as a velociraptor named Katie.  You have to try to collect chicken breasts to fight the dolphins falling from the sky, attached to hot air balloons.  (Dolphins are actually gay sharks) The chicken is used to protect yourself from the dolphins.  For some reasons the dolphins are allergic to chicken and die if they come in contact with anything that has eaten chicken, or the chicken itself.  Of course when they hit you, you lose some of the chicken that you have collected.  If Katie is hit by a dolphin and looses all of her chicken, the player looses.  Some dolphins will require more chicken to defeat.

I have no idea if I will ever finish the game, but I have started writing it, and have built Katie's class.  Either way, it is a more colorful game than I normally work on.

This morning I taught myself the final things that I was misunderstanding, or did not know about Flex. I no longer have any excuse not to write. From here out, it is simply another language with slightly different syntax.  Unfortunately, my time writing, and coding today has come to an end.  Tennis and AP studying calls.

**As a note, I did not write either of the Actionscript files that I linked to above.  The Key class came from [Kirupa.com](http://www.kirupa.com/forum/showpost.php?p=2098269&postcount=319) and the SpriteWithBitmap class came from [shardulbartwal.wordpress.com](http://shardulbartwal.wordpress.com/2009/09/18/using-image-inside-the-sprite-in-flex/) The files are hosted on this blog in-case either of those websites goes off-line, or changes their link structure.**
