---
layout: post
title: "End User Licensing Agreements: Legality and Morality"
date: 2011-03-11 17:35:00
categories: thought
---
*Note: This document was not originally written for this blog.  Instead, it was written for one of my classes, but I am sharing it because I agree with the ideas presented, and it fits the general theme of this website.*

December 27th, 2010 was a very snowy day in northern New York.  On that day, a man named John Michaelson decided to buy new furniture for his home with resources that he had received on Christmas a few days prior. When he came home with a beautiful new table he discovered that it stood an inch and a half too tall to comfortably fit under the chair rail circling the room.  As a carpenter he decided to shorten the table to meet his needs.  Because he had purchased the table and paid in full, this was something that he had the right to do.  Immediately after lowering the table, his front door was broken down, and he was arrested.  Although he used drugs heavily, his arrest had nothing to do with that.  He was arrested because he violated the terms and agreements set up when he purchased the table.  He was only allowed to look at the table; changing it in any way was illegal. That story is quite absurd, but when the table becomes software, and you start to look at the computer industry, it becomes significantly more plausible.  End User Licensing Agreements (EULA) for software need to be standardized to eliminate problems such as the aforementioned for the developer and consumer, and ultimately resolve any tension between the parties.

Before the problems surrounding the mysterious EULA’s can be analyzed, an explanation of what a EULA is must be given.  Right now the Department of Commerce regulates the laws regarding transactions involving goods, such as a table.  Software however is not sold as a good.  Because of the ease of distribution, in most cases the compiled source code, or executable file is not what is sold.  Instead, the right to use the file is sold.  That distinction makes software a service, not a good, which takes the software out of the jurisdiction of the Department of Commerce.  The physical CD or DVD that the software came on is regulated, but not the data included on it.  That is where End User Licensing Agreements come into play.  EULA’s are agreements between the user and the developer about how the software can be used and distributed.  By clicking “Agree” when installing software, the user is essentially signing a legal document.  However, once the user gets to this point, they would have already opened and purchased the software, and it would be impossible to return it to the store.  Regardless of whether or not the user agrees, they click agree to avoid wasting their money.  That is where the problem lies.  EULA’s are such complex legal documents that in most cases it would be difficult to fully understand for the average person even if they did read it.  The legal power of these documents in such a situation is suspect, and the direct reason that some sort of standardization is needed.  If standardization does not occur, then the developer and user will both be at risk of being manipulated by the other party.

For the developer, it is beneficial to take freedoms away from the consumer as a way to remove liability.  Looking at the iTunes EULA, there is a clause that states:

> You also agree that you will not use these products for any purposes prohibited by United States law, including, without limitation, the development, design, manufacture or production of nuclear, missiles, or chemical or biological weapons (8).

How could someone manufacture nuclear weapons with a simple media player?  That is a good question.  While this is an extreme example, it puts into perspective the absurdity of some of the EULA content that is to be treated like a formal document, and it illustrates the desire to avoid risk.  By putting that line in the EULA, Apple removes all risk from themselves.  If someone did create nuclear weapons with iTunes, they would have violated the terms that they agreed to, and would stand fully responsible for their actions.  A more realistic example presents itself in Sony’s Playstation 3 EULA:

> You may not (i) use any unauthorized, illegal, counterfeit, or modified hardware or software in connection with the System Software, including use of tools to bypass, disable, or circumvent any encryption, security, or authentication mechanism for the PS3™ system (9);

While it may appear that Sony makes it impossible for anyone to buy non-Sony equipment or to modify their PS3, that is not the case.  Instead Sony states that the use of an unauthorized controller or modification to the system violates the terms and conditions. By using such, the agreement breaks and Sony is no longer liable for damages.  Both of the above examples clearly state the advantages of having a restrictive End User Licensing Agreement, and illustrate the extent of liability that is removed in doing so.

The developer also makes his job easier by creating a closed system.  If the user has less freedom to manage his equipment and software, then fewer potential changes exist.  By removing options, the developer has to provide support for fewer platforms.  In 2010, Facebook had an average of 7.9 new users per second (Digital Buzz 1).  This rapid growth illustrates the global shift towards Cloud Computing.  Cloud Computing is a type of system where a user access software and data stored on servers, in the “Cloud,” where less software and data is stored on personal equipment.  For Cloud services, the developer simply updates the online software, and everyone receives it.  The next time they connect, they are presented with the changes.  Not all software is Cloud-Based though, for example, the video game industry.  When playing online games, the user connects to servers, but due to the size of the game, it is installed on their local machine.  If the developer wishes to make a change, they can release an update and require everyone to update if they wish to continue to use the online services.  In doing this, the developer no longer has to support multiple versions of the game, and does not have to worry about fixing bugs for past versions.  If the developer creates a restrictive EULA, then they remove the problems associated with diverse systems, and make sure that their users have a fair experience across the board.  John Cooney, a flash developer for Armor Games, said “I would hate to be the guy who has to play a multiplayer game with that person and have an awful time playing them against their exploited version.  Multiplayer updates, yes.  Single-player updates, no” (2).  The developer restricts the consumer’s freedom to make maintenance easier, and to balance the gameplay for their customers. From risk analysis to ease of support, it makes sense for a developer to release software with a EULA that limits consumer freedoms.

While the argument for the developer is strong, the consumer has an equally strong argument from the perspective of freedom.  If something is purchased, the argument can be made that it is owned.  When a service is purchased, an agreement is created.  In the context of software however, the user has no room to argue for different terms.  A EULA is not an agreement with the consumer, but instead a state of being forced upon the consumer.  As explained by Richard Akers, a software developer that specializes in creating ocean simulators for the navy, in an ideal situation, the developer would work to satisfy the consumer, and the consumer would work with the developer to create a better product (Akers 3).  Software should revolve around a symbiotic relationship in which both parties serve the other.  That is not the case though.  Super-corporations like Sony and Apple use their size to manipulate the consumer.  The choice the install software and to modify hardware that has been purchased should be the consumer’s choice, however Sony’s EULA states:

> From time to time, SCE may provide updates, upgrades or services to your PS3™ system to ensure it is functioning properly in accordance with SCE guidelines or provide you with new offerings. Some services may be provided automatically without notice when you are online, and others may be available to you through SCE's online network or authorized channels. Without limitation, services may include the provision of the latest update or download of new release that may include security patches, new technology or revised settings and features which may prevent access to unauthorized or pirated content, or use of unauthorized hardware or software in connection with the PS3™ system. Additionally, you may not be able to view your own content if it includes or displays content that is protected by authentication technology. Some services may change your current settings, cause a loss of data or content, or cause some loss of functionality (11).

In that clause Sony states that functionality may decrease, personal data may be lost, and updates will be occasionally installed without the user’s notification or permission.  That means that Sony not only provides a service, but ultimately controls how the user is allowed to use their service.  In version 3.21 of the PS3 operating system, Sony removed support for OtherOS, a feature that allowed users to install Linux to a Playstation 3 device.  (PS3 1) With the above clause, the user would not be able to opt out of any update, but would be forced into some.  The user does not have complete choice, and Sony ultimately decides when and where features of their devices will be operational. The OtherOS removal update is one of the few that the user could opt out of, but opting out ultimately many of the networking features on the PS3 system. The Norwegian Consumer Council says:

> Sony claims a universal right to change or remove functionality from the gaming console. In our opinion this is in clear violation of the Marketing Control Act, and not the least it’s a breach of trust between the consumer and Sony, says Head of Section Thomas Nortvedt in the Norwegian Consumer Council (Kaldestad 2).

In Norway Sony is not uncontested.  There is a movement for consumer rights and efforts not to eliminate big business, but protect people from their power.  The Consumer Council as well as Sony’s own agreements argue strongly for the rights of the consumer and the desire to choose.

As well as the potential for losing the ability to control a purchased product, the consumer can also be taken advantage of with restrictive EULA’s. Around 2004 a piece of software was released called eWallet. The EULA for this software included the statement:

> GAIN Publishing offers some of the most popular software available on the Internet free of charge ("GAIN-Supported Software") in exchange for your agreement to also install GAIN AdServer software ("GAIN"), which will display Pop-Up, Pop-Under, and other types of ads on your computer based on the information we collect as stated in this Privacy Statement. We refer to consumers who have GAIN on their system as 'Subscribers' (Magid 6).

Essentially this means that users trying to install eWallet would also be forced to install AdServer.  Private data was then collected so that ads could be displayed based on usage at the top of the user’s screen at all times.  Data collected included private browsing history.  While the argument could be made that every user knew what they were getting into because it was in the terms and agreements, this is very far from the truth.  The GAIN Publishing EULA that was used with eWallet was seven pages long, displayed in a small window, four by two inches large at most.  Even if the desire came across a user to completely read a EULA, doing so would prove to be quite difficult.  While AdServer is limited to GAIN, these tricks are not uncommon in the industry.  The current system of regulating End User Licensing Agreements makes it very easy for the consumer to be taken advantage of.

In an ideal situation, both parties would work together.  The idea of taking advantage of a customer is absurd; in good business practice the developer would be to work with the user.  Both parties in this situation, the developer and the consumer, have strong arguments for ideal EULA’s.  And both parties deserve to get some of their requests.  The developer cannot afford risk, and the consumer wants freedom.  Although there have been some improper EULA’s and a few companies use their size to take advantage of consumers and protect themselves more than is really required, most companies use EULAs which protect their developers and customers.  However, these super-companies such as Sony are the reason that regulation and standardization is needed.  The small business does not take advantage of their users, but the giant software corporation can become so disconnected from its user base that taking advantage of something is a common occurrence.  OtherOS, a feature removed from the PS3 operating system was mentioned above.  In response to this, a few developers that had used that feature began working on a way to continue using the features that they had lost.  In the process George Hotz discovered the PS3 rootkey.  A rootkey is a string of characters used to sign a disk.  This would then tell the Playstation that the disk put inside it is a valid disk, and the disk would run accordingly.  Hotz did not set out to destroy Sony’s security.  Instead he set out to get a feature that had been taken away (Hotz).  In response, Sony is suing Hotz and members of fail0verflow, the team Hotz worked with. Mr. Richard Akers jokingly described hackers as “the lowest form of life on Earth, even lower than the NY Yankees” (35), but did Hotz really do anything wrong? He spoke strongly against piracy and instead used personal equipment to gain a feature back for his personal use.  Incidents like this blur the line between acceptable and unacceptable modification and bring up the question of which party is at fault.

Looking at computer engineering in a broader sense, EULA’s also can be used to make reverse engineering illegal.  Reverse engineering is by no means an unacceptable business practice and is common in every other industry.  In the case of Lexmark Int’l v. Static Control Components, Static Control figured out how to make printer cartridges work on a Lexmark printer, and was sued for impersonating Lexmark (Lexmark 2).  Lexmark and other companies like Sony almost always lose their lawsuits.  The clauses put in EULA’s are not valid and take advantage of their customers and these clauses fall short in court.  They allow the cases to be taken to court though.  Super-corporations do not set out to win in court, although there is no opposition to that. Instead they set out to destroy competition.  By taking competition to court, the giant companies use their deep pockets to destroy them. Bleem! and Accolade were both companies destroyed by Sony (Cornell; Sega).  Sony cannot make reverse engineering illegal, but it can present such a strong case against it that any attempts will drop dead. And that is why standardization is needed for End User Licensing Agreements.

Standardization could come in many forms, and all would ease the extent of the problem and have the potential to solve it.  Legal reimbursement for all damages including loss of profit during the time in court would allow the victim companies and individuals to walk away from the situation.  Such financing would not come from the company directly, but instead pass through the government, where it would be part of larger funds collected in an attempt to scare the company in a way that discouraged further action.  The potential also exists to set limits on what could be included in a EULA.  Setting direct standards instead of legal punishments requires a committee to establish guidelines and to act upon individual EULA’s as needed on a case-by-case basis, because without question, there will be exceptions to whatever standard is adapted.  Whatever solution is chosen, whichever form, it ultimately will bring about the needed change to standardization.

The story of John Michaelson was discussed briefly at the beginning of this document.  If standardization were to be put in place, poor men like John could recover from the corporate onslaught.  The problems surrounding End User Licensing Agreements have existed for years, and due to their complexity, have not been solved.  With the size of some companies, said problems are growing and occurring more often.  With the creation of a standardized system of End User Licensing Agreements, the developer and consumer would both be protected, and ultimately, tensions between the two parties would be resolved.  In a world where political debates storm and tempers run rampant about the best path to the future, this is an area where a little bit more government is needed.  Not to break down empires, but to protect the builders of those empires, to protect the consumer, to protect the world.

# Works Cited

Akers, Richard H. E-mail interview. 1 Mar. 2011.

Cooney, John. E-mail interview. 1 Mar. 2011.

"Facebook 2010 Growth Stats: Infographic." Digital Buzz Blog. Web. 06 Mar. 2011. <http://www.digitalbuzzblog.com/facebook-2010-growth-stats-infographic/>.

Hotz, George. "Legal Trouble." GeoHot. Web. 06 Mar. 2011. <http://geohot.com/>.

Kaldestad, Herseth. "PlayStation 3 Violates the Norwegian Marketing Control Act - Forbrukerportalen." Forbrukerportalen - Forbrukerrådet På Nett. Web. 06 Mar. 2011. <http://forbrukerportalen.no/Artikler/2011/ PlayStation_3_violates_the_Norwegian_Marketing_Control_Act>.

"Legal - Licensed Application End User License Agreement." Apple. Web. 06 Mar. 2011. <http://www.apple.com/legal/itunes/appstore/dev/stdeula/>.

"Lexmark Int’l v. Static Control Components." InternetLibrary. Web. 6 Mar. 2011. <http://www.internetlibrary.com/pdf/static-control-lexmark-d-ken.pdf>.

Magid, Larry. "It Pays To Read License Agreements." PC Pitstop: Free PC Scans and Tune-up Utilities. Web. 06 Mar. 2011. <http://www.pcpitstop.com/spycheck/eula.asp>.

"PS3 Firmware (v3.21) Update – PlayStation Blog." PlayStation Blog : The Official PlayStation Blog for News Updates on PlayStation Network, PlayStation 3, PSP and PSPgo. Web. 06 Mar. 2011. <http://blog.us.playstation.com/2010/03/28/ps3-firmware-v3-21-update/>.

"Sega v. Accolade." Digital Law Online Home Page. Web. 06 Mar. 2011. <http://digital-law-online.info/cases/24PQ2D1561.htm>.

"SONY COMPUTER ENTERTAINMENT AMERICA v. BLEEM, ___ F.3d ___ (9th Cir. 2000) (LOISLAW)." Legal Information Institute at Cornell Law School. Web. 06 Mar. 2011. <http://www.law.cornell.edu/copyright/cases/Sony_v_Bleem.htm>.

"SYSTEM SOFTWARE LICENSE AGREEMENT (Version 1.4) FOR THE PlayStation®3 SYSTEM." Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. Web. 06 Mar. 2011. <http://www.scei.co.jp/ps3-eula/ps3_eula_en.html>.
