---
layout: post
title: 2019 Site Refresh
date: 2019-08-28 06:45:00
categories: programming
custom_css:
- syntax
---

I registered *NathanTornquist.com* on Christmas Eve in 2009. Since that first
site was created, this domain has gone through 4 major redesigns eventually landing
on a static website built with Jekyll.

Well before *NathanTornquist.com* was registered, I had my first website back in
2005.

{% include photo.html alt="NathanWeb" img="/assets/2019/08/nathanweb_small.png" %}

The first WordPress site (and first public site) came with a more formal blog
and project pages. At the time, [Arcade Classics][1] was the most recent project
and the history included websites I had built for some local community organizations.

{% include photo.html alt="WordPress" img="/assets/2019/08/2011_small.png" %}

As I began Android development, I switched to a project-forward design:

{% include photos.html
  height="40" id="site-history"
  img1="/assets/2019/08/2013_small.png"
  img2="/assets/2019/08/2014_small.png"
%}

And finally landed with the Jekyll site.

{% include photo.html alt="Jekyll 2015" img="/assets/2019/08/2015_small.png" %}

Since 2015, I've tweaked the home page, but for the most part the structure
was fairly consistent.

{% include photo.html alt="Jekyll 2019" img="/assets/2019/08/2019_small.png" %}

In my most recent redesign in August of 2015, I migrated all my old posts
and content into markdown files and created something a bit cleaner than WordPress.
I was (and still am) very happy to have full version control on every aspect of
the site.

However, that Jekyll transition included some modified and forced themes. I was
using Bootstrap for the grid system, and had another theme running on top. There
was a lot of code and I had not written or even read most of it.

In this redesign I set out with a few goals.

1. Use HTML5 semantic elements
1. Dynamically support light and dark mode
1. Remove heavy gallery plugins
1. Manage/own all styles
1. Remove JS completely

## Use HTML5 Semantic Elements

By using Bootstrap, I had a site layout that was very `div` and `class` heavy.
The site adjusted well, but it was very heavy. The core layout was:

```html
<html>
  ...
  <body>
    <section class="...">
      <div class="container">
        <div class="row">
          <div class="col-...">
            ...
          </div>
        </div>
        ...
      </div>
    </section>
    ...
  </body>
  ...
</html>
```

If you look, there are a minimum of 3 layers from the section to the actual
content in that section. Those layers all control the grouping and alignment of
elements. I wanted to completely remove that, and instead use the new HTML5
elements that described the intent of the content.

These elements include `section`, `article`, `summary` and more. By using these
elements carefully, I was convinced that I could use a very small set of styles
to organize and manage the entire website. Good structure would mean that I
would not need a large number of classes or ids.

## Dynamically support light and dark mode

After reducing the number of styles and elements in the site, I was hoping that
it would be easy to support light and dark mode. In the end, it was even easier
than I expected. I used CSS variables and all of my light/dark mode behavior is
managed with a simple media query:

```css
/* Colors */
:root {
  --color-background: hsl(230, 1%, 98%);

  --color-mono-0: black;
  --color-mono-1: hsl(230, 8%, 24%);
  --color-mono-2: hsl(230, 6%, 44%);
  --color-mono-3: hsl(230, 4%, 64%);

  --color-cyan: hsl(198, 99%, 37%);
  /* ... */
}
@media (prefers-color-scheme: dark) {
  :root {
    --color-background: hsl(220, 13%, 18%);

    --color-mono-0: white;
    --color-mono-1: hsl(220, 14%, 71%);
    --color-mono-2: hsl(220, 9%, 55%);
    --color-mono-3: hsl(220, 10%, 40%);

    --color-cyan: hsl(187, 47%, 55%);
    /* ... */
  }
}
```

I have not provided any switches for the user to manually toggle light/dark mode
and instead the site will respond to the local preferences that their browser
shares.

{% include photo.html alt="Light and Dark Mode" img="/assets/2019/08/light_dark_small.png" %}

## Remove heavy gallery plugins

When I moved the blog to Jekyll, I started using [Photoset Grid][1] with
[Colorbox][2]. Together these tools gave me the ability to include a list of
images and control the layout using `{ layout: "N..." }`.

> ex: `{ layout: "312" }` would give three rows of pictures with three images in
> the first row, one in the second, and two in the third.

While these galleries looked nice, and I really like the features they provided,
the plugins were heavy. They would listen to the window change and readjust all of
the image sizes. This was normally delayed and would adjust the scroll position
as the content caught up.

**I was not happy with the latency.**

As part of the redesign, I wanted to remove any JS in the photo layout, and use
flexbox instead. Browser support is widespread enough that I am not worried about
many issues. Especially because the demographic that I would expect to read this
blog will be on more modern hardware.

From any of my projects or blog posts I now just need to drop in the following code:

```
{% raw %}{% include photos.html
  height="58" id="<local page id>"
  img1="..."
  img2="..."
  img3="..."
%}{% endraw %}
```

The included photos template only supports a single row and up to five images, but it
is easy enough to use a few of these objects in a row to generate a grid
with multiple rows. This also has the huge added benefit of removing the need
for external post/project-specific include files. By making this switch I was
able to remove an enormous number of support files.

The constructed photos object uses flexbox and will dynamically adjust based on the view
width. The resizing of the images is much much faster than previously and the
browser no longer needs to load all the images and wait for the JS sizing to
complete before the total page height can be calculated.

## Manage/own all styles

With Boostrap as the base and Agency (the theme) on top, there were about 8,000
lines of CSS that I had neither written nor read. This meant any modifications to
the site were hacks at best and it was hard to really own. I was using the styles
but they were not mine.

After updating all of the layout system and removing the photo gallery plugins,
I had a minimal, well-structured site that I could actually style.

I started styling from the raw page.

{% include photo.html alt="No CSS" img="/assets/2019/08/no_css_small.png" %}

The other benefit of well-structured HTML is that the browser can infer a lot
of base styles *that are actually good*. I'm happy knowing that if the CSS fails,
the core content of my website is still easy to navigate and consume.

In the end I have:

| Category              | Lines |
|:----------------------|------:|
| Dynamic Coloring      |    45 |
| Structure and spacing |    87 |
| Width adjustments     |    27 |
| Gallery code          |    29 |
| Blog/Project lists    |    11 |
| Syntax highlighting   |    68 |

I'm very happy with how that came together. There is more code for the structure
than I was anticipating, but it's very straightforward and will be easy to manage
day forward. The syntax styles are only loaded if code is displayed, which further
reduces the amount of content for a base page load.

## Remove JS completely

After all of the work for the previous goals, I had a final stretch goal of seeing
if I really needed javascript at all. JS was no longer used for any styling or
content. I was loading the few youtube video references in iframes and did not
need any code to support that.

The only thing left was Google Analytics.

I really enjoy seeing how many visitors I get, but I had been leaning towards
replacing Google Analytics with my own counter for general privacy protection
already. I made the call to remove the analytics without a replacement so that
I could have a clean and fully static website.

## Conclusion and Next Steps

Regarding the original goals:

1. Use HTML5 semantic elements
1. Dynamically support light and dark mode
1. Remove heavy gallery plugins
1. Manage/own all styles
1. Remove JS completely

I am very happy with how things worked out.

* The layout is more responsive than ever while also being very light and very clear.
* The semantic elements have greatly removed nesting and made it much easier to
  also replace and streamline all of the styles in the site.
* I no longer have any events listening to the window size and javascript has been
  removed from the website completely.
* The site automatically adjusts based on the user's light/dark mode preferences.

I met all of the goals that I set out to accomplish, but also lost a few things.

Despite being heavy, the ability to click an image and view a gallery is very nice.
I would like to rebuild that in dedicated pages that allow easier viewing of large
pictures.

Though not a regression, the size of my images is a pretty big disconnect with
the focus on speed and succinctness. I do not have any build scripts or compression
being applied, and the images that I'm loading for the posts are full-size. They're
far bigger files than I need to be loading.

I am waiting to remove the large images. I would like to write a build
script that scales the images down at the same time that I'm reintroducing gallery
support.

I also need to go ahead and build a custom analytics solution for this site.

That's really all though.

1. Optimize images and replace gallery features
2. Introduce new analytics solution

Other than that, I'm very happy with how the update came out, and I'm excited
for what the cleaner codebase will empower in the future.

[1]: {% link _projects/00_arcade_classics.md %}
[2]: https://stylehatch.github.io/photoset-grid/
[3]: http://www.jacklmoore.com/colorbox/
