---
layout: post
title: "MacroPad"
date: 2019-07-03 11:30:00
categories: programming
custom_css:
- colorbox
- youtube_embed
custom_js:
- photoset-grid
- colorbox
---

A few months back I saw the [RoMac][0] and [Plaid][1] (resp) keyboards on Reddit.

{% include /galleries/2019-07-03-macropad-reference.html %}

I'm a big fan of the exposed design and I've been missing a numberpad on my
S65-X. Due to a misunderstanding I missed the ordering window and took that as a
sign that I should just go ahead and design my own!

I started with the following requirements for design:

* Perfectly square
* All mounted components (no breadboards)
* 12 keys

With a 12 key (4x3 layout) I could theoretically have a perfectly square board if
the length of one size was equal to the space 4 keys would need. That would leave
a 1x4 footprint (in switch units) for the other components. A small board also has
the added benefit of fitting within the Eagle free tier and the JLCPCB $2 prototype
limits.

I started with a QFN ATMEGA32 and designed a circuit around that. It was obvious
very quickly that I'd have to use surface mount components. I didn't have nearly
the amount of space that the plaid has along the top of the board.

The [r/PCB][2] community on Reddit was extremely helpful and gave me great advice
for the first version of the board. I added a ferrite bead between the USB ground
and the chip ground, and adjusted all of the via and trace sizes.

{% include /galleries/2019-07-03-macropad-pcb-review.html %}

If you know anything about switch footprints, you'll immediately see something
off about those designs. I had a nice looking design, but when I went to upload
it to JLCPCB it was listing the physical size as 60x60mm. Measuring against the
keyboard at my desk, that was only about 3.15 keys long. Certainly not the 4x(3+1)
sizing that I was going for.

When I had downloaded the component library, I had assumed that the components
should sit next to each other. That was a naive assumption, and as I spent more
time in the tools it became clear how hard it would be to place components if
all the footprints included both the physical size and padding.

After redesigning the boards again in my giant 76mm x 76mm space, I ended up with
the following design, which I sent off to be printed.

{% include /galleries/2019-07-03-macropad-v1-board.html %}

The boards that came back looked great! When I sat down to solder them, I had a
bit of a nasty surprise. 0603 components are pretty easy to solder. You just use
tweezers and I can do it with just my eyes. I had ordered 0603 **metric** diodes.

In the picture below, the small square next to my finger is where the diode is
supposed to sit (with orientation). There was no way I could assemble that with
a plain magnifying glass and soldering iron.

{% include /galleries/2019-07-03-macropad-v1-assembly.html %}

For the second board revision I made the following major changes:

1. ATMEGA32 QFN package to ATMEGA32 TQFP
2. 0603 metric diodes to through-hole
3. mini-a usb master socket to mini-b
4. 2.5x3.2 to 3.2x5 crystal package

These changes all circle around larger package sizes and corrections to
incorrect component <-> footprint selections.

{% include /galleries/2019-07-03-macropad-v2.html %}

Soldering the second revision of boards was much easier. I put the parts on and
connected it to my computer and saw... nothing. These chips are supposed to come
with hot usb drivers and are plug and play with pretty much any computer.

To make sure I didn't have a bad chip, I soldered another complete board and...
still nothing.

This was bad. It's one thing to have component selection issues and have to order
new parts, and it's one thing to have it connect to a computer and have timing
issues, or issues with some part of the lattice. To just do nothing makes it much
harder to make an incremental step forward.

I shared the schematic with friends. I opened up a ticket online. I spent a lot
of time verifying every connection on the schematic against the component
datasheets. I was very worried that this would just be the end of the project.

Either during the switch from a QFN to TQFP package, or from the start I had
swapped the positive and negative usb data lines. I found this while verifying
all of the traces and routing against the chip's datasheet. I wanted to make sure
that the component I was using in Eagle was actually using the right pins. Luckily
this didn't damage the computer or chip, it just kept them from being able to
communicate. A few hours later someone responded to the ticket online and had
identified the same problem. I'm glad I found the issue myself, but regardless
it's great to know that I would have been able to move forward.

I'm also lucky that those two lines both go across the bottom of the board to
get from the USB port to the opposite side of the chip. That meant that I could
manually cut both of the lines and flywire the correct layout.

After doing that the chip connected and was viewable as an active USB device!

{% include /galleries/2019-07-03-macropad-flywire.html %}

From this point on, it was just polish. I needed to spend a bit of time playing
with QMK to get the key layout arranged like I wanted, but it was very
straightforward. I landed on a standard numberpad layout for the first layer
with some modifier keys to jump up to the +-/* keys.

{% include /galleries/2019-07-03-macropad-final.html %}

The board matches my full keyboard and is exactly what I designed it to be. This
project was very different from my normal work, but was really rewarding. There's
something fun about ending up with a physical device.

Any future boards should be significantly easier to design. I've learned a ton
about circuit design, and about what makes a good keyboard. All in all, I wouldn't
recommend my macropad to anyone. It looks like I want, but it turns out that a
single PCB really isn't enough weight to keep something in place on my desk. The
board slides all over the place whenever you press any of the keys. **It's a
terrible tool to actually use.**

If you'd like to learn more, the Eagle files, bill of materials, and QMK config
is all available [here][3].

[0]: https://www.reddit.com/r/MechanicalKeyboards/comments/b74x8n/ic_the_romac_a_plaid_inspired_12key_macropad/
[1]: https://github.com/hsgw/plaid
[2]: https://www.reddit.com/r/PCB
[3]: https://github.com/Tornquist/Macropad
